MPC Bootcamp Subject Book Review Rubric

Summary: A book review is a service to your reader, which, if performed well, comes with a tiny license to pontificate. Your objectives are: to summarize a book in as concise a manner as you can, devoting appropriate attention to its most important points; to flatter the author if at all possible; to help your reader decide whether or not she should buy or read the book. At the end, or at appropriate moments, you are permitted to opine, but do so quickly and keep negativity to a minimum. When you are big and famous, you can bash others; for now, be polite. You will be surprised at how much people appreciate a thorough, informative and upbeat book review. It is an art, and it is also an excellent way to build a resume or curriculum vitae. A handful of good reviews on “academia.edu” can be a very tangible way of demonstrating your seriousness and abilities to future colleagues, employers, admissions officers, etc. Finally, when you need a quick reminder of why a given book matters to you, such as when you have to give a talk or write an essay, having already written a good review of a book will save you much time and effort.

1. Size: A book review should be between 1,000 and 2,000 words (4 to 8 double-spaced pages). If it requires less, then feel free to write less, for, as we say, “less is more.” If it requires more, try cutting all your adverbs and keeping your opinions to yourself until the very end.

2. Purpose, task: A book review should offer your reader a clear presentation of its contents and major points. This is no small feat. It is among the most impressive gestures of appreciation for a profession or a field that one can make. It may be impossible, it may even be wrong, but think of a good book review as one that obviates a generalist’s need to actually read the book and one that indicates exactly why and where a specialist should focus her attention if she does.

3. Tone: The tone of a book review should be as neutral as possible, although some actual engagement is indeed permitted. This is tricky. If you are belligerent throughout, then you are probably not doing a service to your reader. If you withhold your opinion, then you are likewise defeating the purpose. A good strategy is to wait until the final paragraph. This demonstrates respect and indicates that even if you have problems with the book, you still enjoyed engaging with it, as if your arguments were a matter of friendly debate. But, if a person has written a seriously misguided piece of misanthropy, then she probably deserves to take it on the chin.

4. Exceptions: There are controversial points that an author makes that need to be addressed and there are books that are overtly controversial in their own right and thereby demand that a reviewer take them on in some fashion. The most critical reviews of my own work have been written by people whom I greatly respect for having let themselves get emotionally involved with it. But not all authors take criticism in this way. Be advised that neutrality is the best policy, especially if you are seeking to build a professional portfolio of what might be proof of one’s interest in a field and evidence of one’s potential in it.

5. Examples: for a journalistic mode, see Michael Strong’s review of Greenfield’s Stormy Minds; for an academic mode see Eric Graf’s review Byrne’s Law and History in Cervantes’ Don Quixote; for a compound and thematic mode see Steven Poole’s review of Thinking Fast and Slow by Daniel Kahneman and Nudge by Cass Sunstein and Richard Thaler, “Not so Foolish” in Aeon Magazine. Read these and take note of their similarities and differences.
A Calendar for Writing a Book Review

STEP 1 (week 1): Read the preface, the introduction, and the first chapter of the book you are going to review. Read over the liner notes and any commentary on the back cover. Scan or speed read the final chapter or the conclusion. You are looking for material to include in your opening remarks. Around the middle of the first week, write your introduction—i.e., your first paragraph—focusing on the overarching importance or uniqueness of the book, any controversy it might stir, the author’s reputation, etc. Bring a draft of your opening paragraph to the first one-hour session that we have scheduled in order to discuss this step.

STEP 2 (week 2): You should be finishing the book by the middle of the second week. As you do, you should begin to coordinate the notes that you have taken in order to synthesize your summaries of the book’s chapters and to begin to focus on those sections that you have found most important. To this week’s writing workshop bring the following: 1) a broad outline of your book review, 2) first drafts of the paragraphs devoted to the chapter summaries, and 3) a first draft of the final paragraph that will include those subjective responses that you would most like to articulate.

STEP 3 (week 3): Bring your first complete draft of your book review to the workshop. We will perform a peer review exercise, followed by a first revision that will accommodate and incorporate the reactions and suggestions of each of your peers. Did your main points come across? Are there specific sentences that the other readers did not understand and which therefore need “unpacking” or clarification? Did they find any spelling or punctuation errors? By the end of the third week you should schedule your monthly thirty-minute mandatory consultation for the following week. So finish your second draft now and polish it over the weekend.

STEP 4 (week 4): After your consultation with your writing tutor, revise, polish, and then submit the final version of your book review to your subject tutor. As you finalize your review, imagine that your reader is another student who is about to read the book in question. As you write your introduction, your chapter summations, and your conclusion, ask yourself the following series of questions: Why should she care at all? How can you make her reading experience easier? And finally, what impressive points should she definitely take away from the book and what problems does it still leave in your mind?

Your reviews will be bound together with those from other Bootcampers. These reviews will become part of the MPC library.
